add spec for #1620 (#2650)
microsoft/winget-cli: doc/specs/#1620 - Installer selector on multiple matches.md

The UX can be improved here by giving users an option to select the package instead of asking them to re-run the command with Id.

This can be extended to `upgrade`, `show` and `uninstall` commands.

## Inspiration

Whenever I use Winget to install any application there are high chances that there are name collisions with other names and I get multiple suggestions in the table and it's annoying to copy the ID and rerun the command. I guess this is the case for a lot of others as well.

## Solution Design

If we find multiple packages then the user should get a selector.

> It should not be shown if `--diable-interactivity` is set.

### Settings

The user needs to **opt-in** to this feature.

Winget can use `--prompt` and `--no-prompt` flags to enable and disable it respectively.

The user can change the default setting to always show the prompt by -

```pwsh
"packageDisambiguation": "prompt"
```

and disable it by -

```pwsh
"packageDisambiguation": "no-prompt"
```

### Valid inputs

- Number - It should match with a _row number_ (0 will exit the selector)
- Text - It should match either the package _Name_ or _Id_

> - `--source` flag - It refines the search with a specific package source. It can only be used if a user enters text or standalone.

Reviewer: I would extend this to be any of the default query flags. Essentially, I think of the table results as a new source that can be queried against, and whatever is input is the [[-q] <query>] for a search against the new source.

Probably don't need things like `-n` or `--header` or `--accept-source-agreements`, but I would imagine that a majority of the options would still be available
```
Searches for packages from configured sources.

usage: winget search [[-q] <query>] [<options>]

The following command aliases are available:
  find

The following arguments are available:
  -q,--query                  The query used to search for a package

The following options are available:
  --id                        Filter results by id
  --name                      Filter results by name
  --moniker                   Filter results by moniker
  --tag                       Filter results by tag
  --cmd,--command             Filter results by command
  -s,--source                 Find package using the specified source
  -n,--count                  Show no more than specified number of results (between 1 and 1000)
  -e,--exact                  Find package using exact match
  --header                    Optional Windows-Package-Manager REST source HTTP header
  --accept-source-agreements  Accept all source agreements during source operations
```

Author: I never thought it as CLI inside a CLI. Wouldn't that be an overkill for a simple thing? 👀

Reviewer: > I never thought it as CLI inside a CLI. Wouldn't that be an overkill for a simple thing? 👀

It isn’t a CLI in a CLI though.

I'll use the example of the default `winget` source. That source is a pre-indexed source, which is built from the community repository. At its core, the `winget` source is just a database file, called `index.db`. When a user runs `winget search`, the CLI runs several queries against the index (index.db) to come up with a list of the packages matching the search criteria. 

My suggestion is, take all of the results that are returned and store them in a temporary database file. Then, a user can use *any* of the default search parameters when refining  the query.

### Invalid inputs

If a user enters an invalid value it should show an error asking the user for input again,

Example: `1ab`

```pwsh
Invalid input, please enter row number, or package name or id.
```

If a user enters a number that is out of the shown list then they get an error to enter numbers that are in the list.

Example: `23` in the list of `20`` entries

```pwsh
Please enter row number which are present in entries above.
```

### Number of results

> We should add a `--list-count` flag to customize the number of packages listed in the prompt. By default, the user will see a list of 20 packages.

Reviewer: Users already have the `-n,--number` flag they can pass; Perhaps this would be better as a user setting?

```json
 "Interactivity": {
      "description": "Interactivity settings",
      "type": "object",
      "properties": {
        "disable": {
          "description": "Controls whether interactive prompts are shown by the Windows Package Manager client",
          "type": "boolean",
          "default": false
        },
        "listItemLimit":{
	  "description": "Controls how many items are shown in interactive selection lists",
	  "type": "integer",
          "default": 20,
          "minimum": 0
        }
      }
    },

Author: Oh, we can use that... we don't need to add more I guess

> If the number of packages is more than allowed it should show a text saying how many more packages are available

Reviewer: How would users see the additional packages if they don't want any of the first 20?

Author: I thought about it. I felt it was not necessary but more I think about it I feel it's good to have.

`-m` and `--more` flag is ok I feel.

Will add it in the next iteration.

> 23
Please enter row number which are present in entries above.
>
```

If the user enters a name or ID then we should refine the list.

```pwsh
...
Please select a row number, or enter package name or ID to refine search...
> Example

Refined the search to Name/ID with `Example` in it.
No. Name       Id                   Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  Example    Example.Example1     msstore
 2  Example    Example.Example2     winget
 3  Example    Example.Example22    msstore

Please select a row number, or enter package name or ID to refine search...
> _
```

A user can use `--source` flag

Now we only have a package with ID `Example.Example2` in the list because of the queries the user wrote.

```pwsh
Refined the search to Name/ID with `Example` in it.
No. Name       Id                   Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  Example    Example.Example1     msstore
 2  Example    Example.Example2     winget
 3  Example    Example.Example22    msstore

Please select a row number, or enter package name or ID to refine search...
> --source winget
Downloading Example (Example.Example2)...
```

> If the `--source` query matches nothing then ask the user to retry.

Reviewer: I think this gets back to the idea of preference vs requirement. If the user specifies the source, it would be a requirement and not a preference, so if no packages are found using the source, then I would expect the result to be `No package found matching input criteria` and the menu to exit.

> A short note on preferences vs requirements. The original concept has always been that there are user preferences, and user requirements. User requirements must be met in order to proceed; example - a user sets a requirement of x64 packages only, an x86 package can never be installed. If a manifest only contains x86 versions, it won't be available to the user. User preferences change the prioritization, but do not need to be met to proceed; example - a user sets a preference of en-GB for Installer Locale. If a manifest contains the en-GB locale, it will be used, regardless of what the system locale is, but if the en-GB locale is not present, the installation will continue with the most applicable locale.
>  
> User requirements and preferences can be set through the settings file. However, any command line switches override the settings and are treated as a requirement, not as preference. So if the user has a requirement for x64 architecture, but specifically uses `--architecture x86`, then the requirement becomes x86 just for that run of the install command.

Author: Oh, that makes so much sense. Thanks for that. I always that it as a preference.

---
author: Darshan Rander @SirusCodes
created on: 2022-10-29
last updated: 2022-11-11
issue id: 1620
---

# Spec Title

For [#1620](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/issues/1620)

## Abstract

Currently, the winget.exe client simply lists all the matches and if the user wants to install the app they need to re-run the command with Id.

The UX can be improved here by giving users an option to select the package instead of asking them to re-run the command with Id.

This can be extended to `upgrade`, `show` and `uninstall` commands.

## Inspiration

Whenever I use Winget to install any application there are high chances that there are name collisions with other names and I get multiple suggestions in the table and it's annoying to copy the ID and rerun the command. I guess this is the case for a lot of others as well.

## Solution Design

If we find multiple packages then the user should get a selector.

> It should not be shown if `--diable-interactivity` is set.

### Settings

The user needs to **opt-in** to this feature.

> Winget can use `--prompt` and `--no-prompt` flags to enable and disable it respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Winget can use `--prompt` and `--disable-interactivity` flags to enable and disable it respectively.
```

Author: I used `--no-prompt` because @denelon suggested it in https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/pull/2650#issuecomment-1297777064

The user can change the default setting to always show the prompt by -

> ```pwsh
> "packageDisambiguation": "prompt"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
"interactivity" " {
  "packageDisambiguationPrompt": true
}
```
It would be best to use the existing settings structure

Author: This was something from @denelon's https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/pull/2650#issuecomment-1302541619

Reviewer: It isn’t very clear what this is for then, as the way it is described here doesn’t match denelons comment.

I'll take a try at making some smaller tweaks and will create a PR into your branch

Author: Merged

```

and disable it by -

> ```pwsh
> "packageDisambiguation": "no-prompt"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json
"interactivity" " {
  "packageDisambiguationPrompt": false
}
```

```

### Valid inputs

- Number - It should match with a _row number_ (0 will exit the selector)
- Text - It should match either the package _Name_ or _Id_

#### Flags

- `--more` or `-m` flag - It should be used to show more n number of results.
- `--id` - Filter results by id
- `--name` - Filter results by name
- `--moniker` - Filter results by the moniker
- `--tag` - Filter results by tag
- `--cmd` or `--command` - Filter results by command
- `-s` or `--source` - Find the package using the specified source
- `-e` or `--exact` - Find the package using exact match

### Invalid inputs

> If a user enters an invalid value it should show an error asking the user for input again,

Reviewer: I think this could be a point of contention. If using the value as additional refinement, I would prefer it to exit with the message `No package found matching input criteria`. However, this would be a UX choice that denelon or someone else at MSFT would need to make

Author: @denelon or @yao-msft can you please suggest something here?

Reviewer 2: Are you looking for a suggestion on the error or something related to the heuristic for determining error cases?

Reviewer: @denelon - Already resolved it with my recent PR into the forked branch

```pwsh
...
 20  Example Example.Example20 winget

There are 6 more packages available. Use -m or --more to see more.
Please select a row number or refine the search by package name or ID.
> -m
 21  Example Example.Example21 winget
 ...
 26  Example Example.Example26 winget
Please select a row number or refine the search by package name or ID.
>
```

### Refine the search

A user can search results by entering text input. The text input should be compared with the Name and ID in the result.

If a user enters a Name or ID and we found only an exact match then start installing the package else we should show the new refined list to the user.

The text input is said to be invalid only if it doesn't match any of the names or IDs. The user will see an error for invalid input and will be asked to retry.

If the user enters the name/ID and source or only source and there isn't any source then the user will see an error message which says that cannot find the package with the source.

The first query will fetch package details from the indexed database and further refinements will be made to the result from the initial query.

### Tab completion

> The Tab completion would complete the package name/ID and cycle through the package ID on `Tab` press and reverse cycle through it on `Tab` + `Shift`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tab completion would complete the package name/ID and cycle through the package ID on <kbd>Tab</kbd> press and reverse cycle through it on <kbd>Tab</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>.
```

---
author: Darshan Rander @SirusCodes
created on: 2022-10-29
last updated: 2022-10-29
issue id: 1620
---

# Spec Title

For [#1620](https://github.com/microsoft/winget-cli/issues/1620)"

## Abstract

The winget.exe client simply lists all the matches and if the user wants to install the app they need to re-run the command with Id.

The UX can be improved here by giving users an option to select the package instead of asking them to re-run the command with Id.

## Inspiration

> It is not a good experience to copy Id and then run the command again.

Reviewer: Some users (me especially) will not want to use this feature. There should be a way to toggle this feature off in settings, outside of the setting for disabling interactivity.

## Solution Design

If we find multiple packages then the user should get a selector.

winget should ask for user input, for example -

```pwsh
> winget install Powershell
Multiple packages found matching.
No. Name       Id                   Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  PowerShell 9MZ1SNWT0N5D         msstore
 2  PowerShell Microsoft.PowerShell winget

Please select the packages (eg. 2): <user-input>

Installing <user-input>...
```

> `<user-input>` - is the input by user

After the user will give the input the installation should start.

## UI/UX Design

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: Will the user be required to press enter to confirm their input?

Author: Yes

Reviewer: That should be included in the spec then

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: What is the UI/UX if the user provides invalid input?

Author: We can tell them this is an invalid input. Please give the correct input.

Reviewer: That error message should be included in the spec then

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: What rules constitute valid input?

Author: The packages will be placed in the listed in a table. User will type the row number

Reviewer: So if a user entered `1` it would be valid, but what if they entered `1.` or `1withSomeText` or `99999`. These need to be included in the spec. Something like `Only entries which exactly match a row number are considered valid input` with an example table output and then bullet point examples of what would be considered valid or invalid

Author: Yeah will add that in docs

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: How does the user exit the selector if they don't want to choose any of the available options?

Author: We can have something like "0 to exit"

Reviewer: That should be included in the spec then

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: Is there a limit to how many items can be in the selector?

Author: Haven't thought about it. But my initial thought is to show all the matches which we get🤔

Reviewer: If I run `winget install -q " "` there would be 1899 entries for the user to select from, and that's just using the winget source, not including the msstore source or private sources. I'm not saying that it's necessarily a bad idea to show them all, since the current behavior of `winget search` is to show them all.

I believe that once you exceed 10-20 options, the user input wasn't good enough to begin with and it should revert to the list behavior without the selector, with a message like 'please refine your query`

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: Is tab completion valid for the selector?

Author: No

Reviewer: Why wouldn't it be? It could very easily cycle through the row indices. I'd rather hit <kbd>Tab</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd> than <kbd>1</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Tab</kbd> <kbd>Tab</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd>than <kbd>2</kbd> <kbd>Enter</kbd>

Either way, whether it is supported or not supported should be in the spec

Author: I guess it's a personal choice. I prefer `1` `Enter`.
Surely, it can support both, but should it?

What are your opinions @denelon @yao-msft?

Reviewer 2: I'm curious as to whether I would prefer to enter the "number" or the "ID" to disambiguate. My initial thought is that I would type the number.

The number is certainly less typing, but when we think about the tab completion it would likely be less error prone in either case.

If we support both a number or a package identifier, I think I would want the tab to prioritize the package ID first just for the sake of clarity.

In that case, the tab auto complete would be pretty fantastic.

Reviewer: Interesting thoughts;  Although that does bring up the edge case where there may be two packages with the same Identifier from different sources, in which case the number would have to be used instead of the package identifier.

Perhaps that calls for some sort of logic like -
> If user enters a row number, treat it as a selection. 
> If the user has entered text, treat it as a new query using only the table results as the source

That would mean that the behavior would be as follows, assuming a table like this:
```pwsh
> winget install Example
Multiple packages found matching.
No. Name            Id              Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  Example         Example.Package custom
 2  Example Beta    Example.Package winget
 3  Example Browser Example.Browser winget

Please enter a row number or refine your query.
> _
```

User enters `2` -
```pwsh
> 2
Found Example Beta [Example.Package] *****
Downloading ******
```
User enters `1` -
```pwsh
> 1
Found Example [Example.Package] *****
Downloading ******
```
User enters `Example.Browser` -
```pwsh
> Example.Browser
Found Example Browser [Example.Browser] *****
Downloading ******
```
User enters `--source custom`
```pwsh
> --source custom
Found Example [Example.Package] *****
Downloading ******
```
User enters `--source winget` -
```pwsh
> --source winget
Multiple packages found matching.
No. Name            Id              Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  Example Beta    Example.Package winget
 2  Example Browser Example.Browser winget

Please enter a row number or refine your query.
> _
```
User enters `Example.Package` -
```pwsh
> Example.Package
Multiple packages found matching.
No. Name            Id              Source
-------------------------------------------
 1  Example         Example.Package custom
 2  Example Beta    Example.Package winget

Please enter a row number or refine your query.
> _
```
User enters `--source msstore` -
```pwsh
> --source msstore
No package found matching selection criteria.
```

Author: Thanks @Trenly this looks pretty powerful

> The idea is explained in [Solution Design](#solution-design).

Reviewer: Are users required to select an index, or could they enter a package ID if they wanted to?

Author: Both seems fine to me, but index is easier in my opinion. What do you feel?

Reviewer: I'd be more inclined to flexibility. As @denelon likes to say - meet the users where they are. As a user, I would feel more confident entering a full package ID just to have the peace of mind that I didn't make a typo, but I can also see where others would want to use the index

Author: Yeah, supporting both seems like a better idea. Will add it in the doc.

## Capabilities

### Accessibility

> 

Reviewer: New text in the menu (e.g `Please select the packages`) will need to be localized. There may need to be considerations made for if the indices used for selecting packages also need to be localized

Author: Do windows localize numerical forms automatically?

Reviewer: I'm not sure, but it would need to be a consideration that needs to be made as to whether they will or won't be

Author: I will verify it and add in the spec

It should not have any direct impact on screen readers.

### Security

It should not have any security issues.

### Reliability

> This will help the users to have a better experience and would decrease the chance of human error while copy-pasting the Id.

Reviewer: Will there need to be any measures taken against mistyping the selection? It is a lot easier to accidentally type `2` instead of `3`  than it is to enter an incorrect package ID.

Author: Yeah, it's something which is something that can happen. Adding another prompt to take the confirmation saying "Do you want to install XYZ package? (Y/n): ". But again, it's an extra step.

I would add this in the in doc. Don't have any idea how we can handle it

Reviewer: Perhaps it's a future consideration

### Compatibility

> It will not break anything.

Author: Oh, never knew this. Thanks for highlighting this.

### Performance, Power, and Efficiency

## Potential Issues

> 

Reviewer: There is a potential issue where non-interactivity would need to be preserved. Please add in specifications for how the client should behave when interactivity is disabled through the COM context, through the `--disable-interactivity` argument, or through user settings.

> 

Reviewer: There is potential confusion when using the `--silent` argument. As a user, I would expect that `--silent` would not lead to an interactive menu. Having reviewed the spec and being familiar with how Winget works, I understand that the selector is not part of the package install, but this could be a sticking point for many new users and should be preempted.

Author: Yeah, we should not show selector when `--silent` argument is passed.

Reviewer: > Yeah, we should not show selector when `--silent` argument is passed.

I think more opinions would be needed here. IMO `--silent` shouldn't control how winget behaves as a CLI, that's what the `--disable-interactivity` prompt is for. My point was more that some mention should be made around this, or it should be documented that `--silent` doesn't suppress this and that `--disable-interactivity` would. @yao-msft and @ryfu-msft would be the experts here though

The user might not be negatively impacted by this, as it is geared towards simplifying the installation process in case of multiple matches.

## Future considerations

As far as I know currently (v1.3.2691) widget doesn't support installing multiple packages in a single command.

For Example -

```pswh
winget install Powershell Git
```

The above command will not install anything.

> If will ever support this then we might consider having _multiple_, _range_ and _not_ selectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is ever supported, potential considerations include having _multiple_, _range_ and _not_ selectors.
```
It is best practice to not reference a specific viewpoint such as `we`

Author: Thanks, will keep this in mind.
